Create blog post for design and philosophy of package (#249)
posit-dev/great-tables: docs/blog/design-philosophy/index.qmd

![](./nippur_cuneiform_tablet.png)

<p style="font-size: 12px;">Cuneiform tablet, temple of Enlil at Nippur, (CBS 3323, University of Pennsylvania).</p>

You can see right away that there is a more regular grid and, if you probe deeper, there are more similarities than differerences with the tables of today. This contains sources of revenue and monthly disbursements for nearly 50 temple personnel. While it can be difficult to see it, you should take it on good authority[^7] that the following table elements are present:

- column headings (month names) and row titles (names/professions of individuals).
- cells with no information (look at the blank or smooth cells along rows)
- numerical values in the cells
- subtotals for each individual are every six months
- grand totals adjacent to row labels
- annotations with explanatory notes under those columns containing totals

Later on, tables were less inscribed on clay and more on wax tablets, papyrus, paper, and eventually tables became computerized. What a trip it has been for tables!

### Midcentury modern tables

> There's a prehistory to modern, computerized tables and perhaps the best period for tables was around the middle of the 20th century. Technologies for table (and surrounding document) preparation included the offset printer, the typewriter, and varitype[^8] (my favorite). While constrained by the limited space available on pages, tabular design at this point had many solutions for either fitting tables into single, variously-sized pages or distributing the table content across multiple pages.

Reviewer: The piece I latched onto was that this time was the best period for tables. But I don't know why. I don't know why this paragraph said that and then listed technology, etc.. (is this the best period for tables because of how they were printed, or something else?).

I would address what made this the best period for tables directly in this paragraph, and then push everything to a new paragraph. (If the answer is that these formats induced something nice in tables, I could see them being a part of it!).

> While there were knowledgeable practictioners who could well perform the task of typesetting tables in books, there wasn't much in the way of books about tabular presentation and all the attendant theoretical and practical approaches one might take. To remedy this (but more likely to serve as an internal tool for the organization), the United States Bureau of the Census published their *Manual of Tabular Presentation*[^9]. It is truly a remarkable work and one can readily plumb the considerable depths of this monograph for its excellent recommendations on tabular design. It spares no detail on how the department classifies the different parts of a table, describing the function of each part in rigorous detail. Moreover, it is easy to read and thankfully provides many examples in visual form. Through its many hundreds of paragraphs, the authors make strong recommendations on what to do (and what *not* to do) for many tabulation scenarios.

Reviewer: You primed the pipe for people to expect great things of this era. Just punch them in the face with the manual of tabular presentation! I tried to cut out redundant sentence, and connect some pieces directly together.

```suggestion
Another reason this was a great period for tables is the publication of the *Manual of Tabular Presentation*[^9] by the United States Bureau of the Census. It is truly a remarkable work, which spares no detail on how the department classifies the different parts of a table, describing the function of each part in rigorous detail. Moreover, it is easy to read, thanks to its many visual examples. Throughout its hundreds of pages, the authors make strong recommendations on what to do (and what *not* to do) for many tabulation scenarios.
```

The **Spanner Labels** are pieces of text that span across **Column Labels**, allowing for some grouping of columns where it makes sense. This is important for the readability of tables, especially wider tables having many columns.

Aside from a table's stuctural considerations, we also believe that the data values contained within the cells often require formatting before presentation, since the representation for computing isn't always optimal for readers of a table. To that end, we provide a large collection of formatting methods that are purpose-built for each type of formatting operation. While focused on simplicity they are also powerful, giving you the ability to customize values to your liking. We want users all over the world to be able to use **Great Tables** successfully so we built in locale-based formatting options, based on the latest guidance from the [Unicode CLDR](https://cldr.unicode.org).

> 

Reviewer 2: Another "i suspect you don't want to add this" but in gt docs,
but I like this thin image at about here. 

https://gt.rstudio.com/reference/figures/gt_workflow_diagram.svg

You'd need to modify a few things, but for visual learners, it's sumarizes nicely what you said above. Take your table, and great_tables helps you convert that into a great_table object with package modifiers, and gets it ready for export.

The majority of open-source software packages that deal with tables seem to be more focused on the display of simple yet large tables. We wanted to be different in this regard and instead focus on the task of generating summary tables. Those open-source table projects typically produce tables with pagination and other such controls to navigate and filter hundreds, thousands, maybe even more records. And that is great for those situations where you'd want to expose a database of records for a user to explore. But we wanted to go the other way and help the type of user that wanted to present smaller, summarized data. This is typically what you see in journal articles, in books, and in periodicals like [*The Economist*](https://www.economist.com/economic-and-financial-indicators/2024/03/14/economic-data-commodities-and-markets). We long held that there was an unaddressed need for users to create highly customized tables that could serve as interesting visualizations.

> 

Reviewer 2: Not totally sure if you need or will want this, but consider a new section or sub-heading here. 
It seems like we are going into another section, above is "What Great Tables Brings to the Table" or "How Great Tables Works", and below here is a "First Steps with Great Tables" or "Getting Started"

> 

Reviewer 2: > [*The Economist*](https://www.economist.com/economic-and-financial-indicators/2024/03/14/economic-data-commodities-and-markets)

If you make the link https://www.economist.com/economic-and-financial-indicators/, it'll link to a list of the most recently market and financial indicators, not just last week's.
